The following content is provided under
a Creative Common License. Your support
will help MIT Open Courseware continue
to offer highquality educational
resources for free. To make a donation
or to view additional materials from
hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT
OpenCourseware at ocw.mit.edu.
It's because if I was not, this would be
basically the last topic we would ever
see. And this is arguably probably the
most important topic in statistics or at
least that's probably the reason why
most of you are taking this class
because regression
implies prediction and prediction is
what people are all after now, right?
You don't need to understand what the
model for the financial market is. If
you actually have a formula to predict
what uh the stock prices are going to be
tomorrow and regression in a way allows
us to do that. And we'll start with a
very simple version of regression which
is linear regression which is the most
standard one. And then we'll move on to
slightly more advanced notions such as
nonparametric regression. At least we're
going to see the principles behind it.
And uh I'll touch upon a little bit of
high dimensional regression which is
what people are doing today.
So the goal of regression is to try to
predict one variable based on another
variable. All right. So here the
notation is very important. It's
extremely standard. It goes from one uh
it goes everywhere essentially and
essentially you have you're trying to
explain y as a function of x. Okay,
which is the usual yals f ofx question
except that you know if you look at a
calculus class, people tell you yals f
ofx
and they give you a specific form for f
and then you do something. Here we're
just going to try to estimate what this
link function is. And this is why we
often call uh y the explained variable
and x the explanatory variable. All
right. So um we're statisticians. So we
start with data. All right. And what
does our data look like? Well, it looks
like a bunch of input output to this
relationship. All right. So we have a
bunch of xi yi. Those are pairs. And I
can do a scatter plot of those guys.
Right? So each point here has a x
coordinate which is x i and a
ycoordinate which is y i. And here I
have a bunch of end points and I just
draw them like that. Now if so the
functions we're going to be interested
in are often function of the form y = a
+ b * x. Okay. And that means that this
function looks like this.
So if I do x and y, this function looks
exactly like a line and clearly those
points are not on a line and it will
basically never happen that those points
are on a line. There's a famous uh
t-shirt from I think UC Berkeley stats
department that shows this picture and
put a line in between them like we're
going to see it and it says uh
statisticians so many points and you
still managed to miss all of them and uh
and so basically essentially we don't
believe that this relationship y is
equal to a plus bx is true but maybe up
to some noise and that's where the
statistics is going to come into play.
there's going to be some random noise
that's going to play out and hopefully
the noise is going to be spread out
evenly so that we can average it uh if
we have enough points average it out.
Okay. And so this epsilon here is not
necessarily due to randomness but again
just like we did modeling in the first
place it essentially accounts for
everything we don't understand about
this relationship. All right. So for
example
uh uh so here I'm not going to be uh so
okay give me one second. So uh I'll see
we'll see an example in a second. But
the idea here is that if you have data
and if you believe that it's of the form
a plus bx plus some noise, you're trying
to find the line that will explain your
data the best. Right? In the terminology
we've been using before. This would be
the most likely line that explains the
data. So we can see that it's lately
we've just added another dimension to
our statistical problem. We don't have
just x's, but we have y's, and we're
trying to find the most likely
explanation of the relationship between
y and x. All right? And so
in practice, the way it's going to look
like is that we're going to have
basically two parameters to find the
slope b and the intercept a. And given
data, the goal is going to be to try to
find the best possible line. All right?
So what we're going to find is not
exactly A and B the ones that actually
generate the data but some estim est est
est est est est est est est est est est
est est est est est est est estimators
of those parameters a hat and b hat
constructed from the data all right so
we'll see that more generally but we're
not going to go too much in the details
of this it there's actually quite a bit
that you can understand if you do what's
called univariate regression when x is
actually a real valued uh random
variable so when this happens this is
called univariate regression
[Applause]
And when X is in RP
for P larger than or equal to two, this
is called multivariate regression.
Okay. And so here we're just trying to
explain y is a + b x plus epsilon. And
here we're going to have something more
complicated. We're going to have y,
which is equal to a + b1 x1 + b2
x2 + b p xp
plus epsilon where x is equal to the
coordinates of x are given by x1 2xp or
p. Okay, so it's still linear, right?
they still add all the coordinates of x
with a coefficient in front of them but
it's a bit more complicated than just
one coefficient for one coordinate of x.
Okay. So we'll come back to multivate
regression. Uh there's a of course you
can write this as a uh uh xrpose b
right. So this entire thing here
this linear combination is of the form
xrpose b where b is the vector that has
coordinates b1 to bp.
Okay.
Uh sorry here it's in our d
p is the natural notation.
All right. So our goal here in the
univariate one is to try to write a
model make sense of this little twiddle
here essentially from a statistical
modeling question is going to be able to
the question is going to be what
distributional assumptions do you want
to put on epsilon are you going to say
they're Gaussian or you going to say
they are
binomial uh
okay um are you going to say they're
binomial? Are you going to say they're
Bernly? Uh so that's going to be uh what
we're going to make sense. And then
we're going to try to find a method to
estimate A and B. And then maybe we're
going to try to do some inference about
A and B. Maybe test if A and B take
certain values if they're less than
something. Maybe find some confidence
regions for A and B. All right.
So why would you want to do this? Well,
I'm sure all of you have an application
why. If I give you some X, you're trying
to predict what Y is. Machine learning
is all about doing this, right? Without
maybe trying to even understand the
physics behind this. They're saying,
well, you give me a bag of words. I want
to understand whether it's going to be a
spam or not. You give me a bunch of
indic economic indicators. I want you to
tell me how much I should be selling my
car for. uh you give me a bunch of uh uh
uh measurements on some patient. I want
you to predict how this person is going
to respond to my drug and things like
this. All right? And so
often we actually don't have much
modeling intuition about what the
relationship between X and Y is. And
this linear thing is basically the
simplest function we can think of.
Arguably
linear functions are the simplest
functions that are not trivial.
Otherwise, we would just say, well,
let's just predict X Y to be a constant,
meaning it does not depend on X. But if
you wanted to depend on X, linear
functions are basically as simple as it
gets. Turns out, amazingly, this does
the trick quite often. All right, so for
example, if you look at economics, you
might want to assume that the demand is
a linear function of the price. All
right, so if your price is zero, there's
going to be a certain demand, and as the
price increases, the demand is going to
move. Do you think B is going to be
positive or negative here?
What?
Typically, it's negative. Unless we're
talking about maybe luxury goods. Uh
where, you know, the more expensive the
more people actually want it. Uh I mean,
if we're talking about actual economic
demand, it's probably uh definitely
negative. All right. Uh it doesn't have
to be, you know, clearly
uh uh linear so that you can actually
make it linear, transform it into some
linear. So for for example you have this
like multiplicative relationship right P
uh you know PV equals NRT which is the
IDS ga ideal gas law. uh if you want to
actually write this relationship if you
want to predict what the pressure is
going to be as a function of the volume
and the temperature
uh and uh well let's assume that the uh
so n is the avagadra constant and let's
assume that the the radius is actually
uh fixed then uh you have basically you
take the log on each side right so you
get pv equals nrt
Okay. So,
so what that means is that log PV is
equal to log n RT.
So that means that log P
plus log V is equal to log
N R
plus log T.
Okay. So this here we said that R is
constant. So this is actually a
constant. I'm going to call it A.
And then that means that log P
is equal to minus log B.
Seriously uh
that log p is equal to a
uh minus log v
plus log t.
Okay. And so in particular if I write b
uh equal to -1 and c equal to + one this
gives me the formula that I have here.
Now again it might be the case that you
know this is the ideal gas law. So in
practice if I start recording pressure
and temperature and volume those things
I might make measurement errors it might
be slightly different conditions in such
a way that I'm not going to get exactly
those and I'm just going to put this
little twiddle to account for the fact
that the points that I'm going to be
recording for log pressure log volume
and log temperature are not going to be
exactly on one line. Okay, they're going
to be close. Actually, in those physics
experiments, usually they're very close.
It's actually because the conditions are
controlled in under lab experiments. So,
it means that the noise is very small.
And uh but for other cases like demand
and price, this is not a law of physics.
And so, this might change. Uh even the
linear structure is probably not clear,
right? At some point, there's probably
going to be some weird curvature
happening. All right. So this slide is
just to tell you maybe you don't have
obviously a linear relationship but
maybe you do if you start taking logs
expect uh exponentials squares you can
sometimes take the product of two
variables things like this right so this
is variable transformation and it's
mostly domain specific so we're not
going to go into much details of this
any questions.
All right. So, um, now I'm going to be
given, uh, um, so if we start thinking a
little more about what those
coefficients should be. Well, remember,
so just everybody's clear why I don't
put the little i here,
[Applause]
right? I don't put the little i because
I'm just talking about a generic x and a
generic y, but the observations are x1,
y1, right? So typically on the
blackboard I'm often going to write only
XY
but the data really is
X1 Y1
all the way to XN YN. Right? So those
are this points in this two-dimensional
plot. And uh but I think of those as
being copies independent copies of
of the pair XY. Okay,
they have to have the the to contain the
relationship. And so when I talk about
distribution of those random variables,
I can only I talk about the distribution
of XY and that's the same. Right? So the
first thing you might want to ask is,
well, if I have an infinite amount of
data,
what do I what what can I hope to get
for A and B, right? If my sample size
goes to infinity, then I should actually
know exactly what the distribution of XY
is. And so there should be an A and a B
that captures this linear relationship
between Y and X. Okay? And so in
particular, we're going to try to ask
the population or theoretic values of A
and B. And you can see that you can
actually compute them explicitly. So
let's just try to find how. So as I
said, we have a bunch of points on this
line
close to a line.
And I'm trying to find the best fit.
All right? So this guy is not a good
fit. This guy is not a good fit. And we
know that this guy is a good fit
somehow. So we need to mathematically
formulate the fact that this line here
is better than this line here or better
than this line here. So what we're
trying to do is to create a function
that has values that are smaller for
this curve and larger for these two
curves. And the way we do it is by
measuring the fit. And the fit is
essentially the aggregate distance of
all the points to the curve. All right?
And there's many ways I can measure the
distance to a curve, right? So if I want
to find, so let's just open a
parenthesis. If I have a point here, so
we're going to do it for one point at a
time. So if I have a point, there's many
ways I can measure it distance to the
curve, right? I can measure it like
that.
That is one distance to the curve. I can
measure it like that by having a right
angle here. That is one distance to the
curve. Or I can measure it like that.
that is another distance to the curve,
right?
There's many ways I can go for it. It
turns out that one is actually going to
be fairly convenient for us and that's
the one that says let's look at the
square of the value of x on the curve.
Right? So if this is the curve
y is equal to a + bx.
Now I'm going to think of this point as
a random point capital X capital Y.
Okay. And so that means that it's going
to be instant. It's going to be X1 X Y1
or X2 Y2 etc. Now I want to measure the
distance. Can somebody tell me which of
the three the first one the second one
or the third one this formula
expectation of y - a minus bx^2 is is is
which of the three is it representing?
The second one where I have the right
angle.
Okay. Everybody agrees with this.
Anybody wants to vote for something
else? Yeah. The third one. Who?
Everybody agrees with the third one. So,
by default, everybody's on the first
one. Yeah.
Yeah. It is the vertical distance
actually. Right. So, and the reason is
if it was the one with the straight
angle with the right angle, it would
actually be very complicated
mathematical formula. So let's just see
why, right? So and by y I mean y okay so
uh this is this means that this is my x
okay and this is my y
right so that means that this point is
xy
so what I'm measuring is the difference
between y
minus a + b * x right
this is the thing I'm going to take the
expectation of the square and then the
expect So a + b * x if this is this line
this is this point. So that's this value
here.
This value here is a
plus bx. Right?
So what I'm really measuring is the
difference between y and m plus bx which
is this distance here.
And since I like things like Pythagoras
theorem, uh I'm actually going to put a
square here before I take the
expectation.
Okay, so now this is a random variable.
This is this random variable. And so I
want a number. So I'm going to turn it
into a deterministic number. And the way
I do this is by taking expectation.
Okay? And doing expectation. If you
think expectation should be close to
average, this is the same thing as
saying I want that in average the y's
are close to the a plus bx, right? So
we're doing it in expectation, but
that's going to translate into doing it
in average for all the points. All
right. So this is the thing I want to
measure. So that's this vertical
distance. Yeah.
Oh, again. Okay. Sorry. I'm just uh
this is my fault actually. Um
maybe we should close those shades.
Okay. I cannot I cannot do just uh one
at a time. Sorry.
Okay. So
the uh um
All right. So now that I do those uh
vertical distances, I can I can ask well
now I have this function, right? to have
a function that takes two parameters a
and b maps it to the expectation of y -
a + b x^2
sorry the square is here and I can ask
well this is a function that measures
the fit of the parameters a and b right
this function should be small the value
of this function here
function
of a and E
that measures
how close
the
um point
xy
is to the line
a + b * x. Well, y is equal a + b * x.
uh in expectation.
Okay, agreed? This is what we we just
said. And you can think if again if
you're not comfortable with the reason
why to expectations, just think about
having data points and taking the
average value for this guy. So it's
basically an aggregate distance of the
points uh to their uh to the uh the the
line. Okay, everybody agrees this is a
legitimate measure. If all my points
were on the line, if my distribution, if
y was actually equal to a plus bx for
some a and b, then this function would
be equal to zero for the correct a and
b, right?
If they're far, well, it's going to
depend on how much noise I'm getting.
But it's still going to be minimized for
the best one. So, let's minimize this
thing.
So
here I don't make any uh again sorry uh
I don't make any assumption on um on uh
uh the distribution of x or y here I
assume somehow that the variance of x
is not equal to zero. Can somebody tell
me why? Yeah.
No, here I've actually written the
expectation of the square.
If I wanted to write the square of the
expectation, I would just do this.
So, so let's just make it clear,
right? Do you want me to put an extra
set of parenthesis? That's what you want
me to do.
Yeah.
Okay. That's the one that makes sense.
So, the square of the expectation.
Yeah.
The expectation of the square. Sorry.
Yeah. Dyslexia. All right. Uh, any
question?
Yeah.
Does this assume that the error is
Gaussian?
No.
I mean in the sense that like if we knew
that the error was like
follow
we want to minimize the
y
why
so you know the answer to your question
so I just want you to use the words that
uh right so why would you want to use
the fourth power
because like we want more
expectations
to be very rare
or more rare than
yeah so
that would be the maximum likelihood
estimator that you're describing to me
right I can actually write the
likelihood of a pair of numbers AB and
if I know this that's actually what's
going to come into it because I know
that the density
is going to come in into play when I
talk about the but here I'm just talking
about a this is a mechanical tool I'm
just saying let's minimize the distance
to the curve another thing I could have
done is take the absolute value of this
thing for example I just decided to take
the square before I did it okay so
regardless of what I'm doing I'm just
taking the squares because that's just
going to be convenient for me to do my
computations for now but we don't have
any statistical model at this point
right I didn't say anything that y
follows this x follows this. I'm just
doing minimal assumptions as we go. All
right.
So, the variance of x is not equal to
zero. Can somebody tell me why?
What would happen in my what would my
point cloud point look like if the
variance of x was equal to zero? Yeah,
they would all be at the same point. So,
it's going to be hard for me to start
fitting a line, right? I mean, best case
scenario, I have this x, it has variance
zero. So, this is the expectation of x
and all my points
have the same expectation
then so yes I could probably fit that
line but uh that wouldn't help very much
for other x's right so I need a bit of
variance so that things spread out a
little bit and um and uh
okay I'm going to have to do this
I think it's just my um
Okay, let's hope I'm gonna
All right, so I'm going to put a little
bit of less variance and the other thing
is here I don't want to do much more but
I'm actually going to think of X as
having
uh mean zero and the way I do this is as
follows. Let's define X tilda which is X
minus the expectation of X.
Okay. So definitely the expectation of X
tilda is what?
Zero. Okay. And so now I want to
minimize
in AB
expectation of Y
minus A + B X
squared.
And what I'm going to the way I'm going
to do this
is by turning X into X tilda and
stuffing the extra
um and and putting the extra uh um uh
expectation of X into the A. Okay. So
I'm going to write this as expectation
of y minus
a plus b
uh expectation of x
which I'm going to call a tilda
and plus b xtilda.
Okay.
And uh everybody agrees with this. So
now I have two parameters a tilda and b.
And I'm gonna pretend that now X so now
it's the role of X is played by X tilda
which is now a uh which is now a
centered random variable. Okay. So I'm
going to call this guy a tilda. But for
for my computations I'm going to call it
a. So how do I find the minimum of this
thing?
Derivative equal to zero. Right? So here
it's a quadratic thing. It's going to be
like that. I take the derivative set it
to zero. So I'm first going to take the
derivative with respect to a and set it
equal to zero. So that's equivalent to
saying that the expectation of well here
I'm going to pick up a two
y minus
um a + b x
tilda
is equal to zero. And then I also have
that the derivative with respect to b is
equal to zero which is equivalent to the
expectation of well I have a negative
sign somewhere so let me put it here -
2x tilda y -
a + b x tilda.
Okay. See that's why I don't want to put
too many parenthesis. Uh
okay
so I just took the derivative with
respect to a which is just basically the
square and then I have a negative one
that comes out from inside and then I
take the derivative with respect to b
and I have since b has x tilda in factor
it comes out as well right so the
minus2's really won't matter for me
and so now I have two equations the
first equation well it's pretty simple
It's just telling me that the
expectation of y minus a is equal to
zero. So what I know is that a is equal
to the expectation
of
y. And really that was a tilda which
implies that the a I want is actually
equal to the expectation
of uh
y
minus b * the expectation
of x.
Okay.
just because a tilda is a plus b times
the expectation of x.
So that's for my a and then for my b I
use the second one. So the second one
tells me that the expectation of x tilda
y
is equal to a + b * the expectation of x
tilda which is zero. Right?
Okay. But this a is actually a tilda in
this problem. So it's actually a plus b
expectation of x.
Now this is the expectation of the
product of two random variables but x
tilda is centered right? It's x minus
expectation of x. So this thing is
actually equal to the coariance between
x and y by definition of coariance.
So now I have everything I need, right?
How do I just
I'm sorry about that. Uh so I have
everything I need. Now I'm just I have
two equations with two unknowns. And uh
all I have to do is to basically plug it
in. So it's essentially telling me that
the coariance of XY. So the first
equation tells me that the coariance of
XY is equal to A plus B expectation of
X. But a is expectation of y minus b
expectation of x. So uh
it's well actually maybe I should start
with b.
Oh sorry sorry sorry. Okay I forgot one
thing. Sorry this is not true. Right? I
forgot this term. X tilda multiplies X
tilda here. So what I'm left with is
Xtilda. It's minus B times the
expectation of X tilda squared. So
that's actually minus B times the
variance of X tilda because XTilda is
already centered. Okay, which is
actually the variance of X.
Okay. So now I have that this thing is
actually a plus b expectation of x minus
b variance
of x.
And I also have that a
is equal to expectation of y
minus b expectation of x.
Okay. So if I sum the two
Right? So if I sum the two, those guys
are going to cancel.
Those guys are going to cancel.
And so what I'm going to be left with is
coariance of XY is equal to expectation
of X, expectation of Y.
And then I'm left with this term here
minus B times the variance of X.
And so that tells me that B,
why do I still have the variance there?
Y
but sex still the center right so you
just you just need to have one that's
centered for this to work
oh I see
um
right I mean you can check it but uh
basically when you're going to have the
product of the expectations you only
need one of the two in the product to be
zero so the product is zero so um okay
why do kept my uh so I get a a and then
the b expectation. Okay, so that's
probably earlier that I made a mistake.
So I get a So this was a tilda
clear about the
So that tells me that a tilda maybe it's
not super fair of me to
yeah okay I think I know where I made a
mistake I should not have centered I
wanted to make my life easier and I
should not have done that and the reason
is a tilda depends on b so when I take
the derivative with respect to b what
I'm left with here since a tilda depends
on b when I take the derivative of this
guy I actually don't get a tilda here
but I really get um
sorry so again this was not uh
so that's the first one yeah so
this is actually here,
right? When I take the derivative with
respect to B.
And so now what I'm left with is that
the expectation. So yeah, I'm basically
left with nothing that helps. So um I'm
sorry about that. Let's start from the
the beginning because this is not
getting us anywhere and any and a fix is
not going to help. So let's just do it
again. Sorry about that. So let's not
center anything and just just do it
brute force because we're gonna b x^
squ. All right,
partial with respect to a is giving
equals zero is equivalent. So my minus
two is going to cancel, right? So I'm
going to actually forget about this. So
it's actually telling me that the
expectation of y
minus
a + b x is equal to zero which is
equivalent to a + b expectation of x is
equal to the expectation of y. Now, if I
take the derivative with respect to B
and set it equal to zero, this is
telling me that the expectation of uh
well, it's the same thing except that
this time I'm going to pull out an x.
This guy is equal to zero.
This guy is not here. And so that
implies that the expectation
of XY
is equal
to A * the expectation of X plus B times
the expectation
of X squ.
Okay.
All right. So the first one is actually
uh not giving me much. So I need to
actually work with the two of those
guys. So I'm going to take the first. So
let me rewrite those two equal
inequalities that I have. I have a plus
b e of x is equal to e of y
and then I have e of xy.
Okay. And now the what I do is that I
take the I multiply
um
this guy. So I want to cancel one of
these things, right? So what I'm going
to
uh
yeah, so I'm going to take this guy and
I'm going to multiply it by E of X and
take the difference.
Okay. So I do times E of X and then I
take the diff I take the I take the sum
of those two and then those two terms
are going to cancel. Okay. So then that
tells me that B * E of X^
squared plus the expectation
of X Y is equal to.
So this guy uh is the one that
cancelled.
Then I get this guy here expectation of
X times expectation of Y plus uh the guy
that remains here which is uh B times
the expectation of X^2.
So here I have B expectation of X the
whole thing squared and here I have B
expectation of X squar. So if I pull
this guy here what do I get?
B times the variance of X. Okay so I'm
going to move here and this guy here.
When I move this guy here I get
expectation of X time Y minus the
expectation of X times the expectation
of Y. So this is actually telling me
that the covariance of X and Y is equal
to B * the variance of X.
And so that then that tells me that B
is equal to uh coariance
of XY divided by the variance of X. And
that's why I actually need the variance
of X to be non zero because I couldn't
do that otherwise.
And because if it was, it would mean
that B should be plus infinity, which is
what the limit of this guy is when the
variance goes to zero. Okay? Or negative
infinity. I cannot sort them out.
All right? So I'm sorry about the mess,
but uh that should be uh more clear.
Then a of course you can write it as a
by plugging in the value of b. So you
know it it's only a function of your
distribution, right? So what are the
characteristics of the distri? So
distribution can have a bunch of things.
It can have moments of order four of
order 26. It can have heavy tails or
light tails. But when you compute le
squares, the only thing that matters are
the variance of x, the expectation of
the individual ones. And really what
captures how y changes when you change x
is is captured in the coariance. The
rest is really just normalization,
right? It's just telling you I want
things to cross the y-axis at the right
place. I want things to cross the x-axis
at the right place. But the slope is
really captured by how much more
coariance you have relative to the
variance of x. Okay. So this is
essentially setting the scale for the
x-axis and this is telling you for a
unit scale. This is the uh unit of y
that you're changing.
Okay. So we have explicit forms and what
I could do if I wanted to estimate those
things is just say well again we have
expectations right the coariance is the
expectation of XY minus the product of
the expectations I could replace
expectations by averages and get an
empirical coariance just like we can
replace the expectations for the
variance and get a sample coariance and
this is basically what we're going to be
doing all right this is essentially what
you want the problem is that if you view
it that way you sort of prevent yourself
from being able to solve the multivaried
problem because it's only in the
univaried problem that you have closed
form solutions for your problem. But if
you actually go to multivariate, this is
not where you want to replace
expectations by averages. You actually
want to replace expectation by averages
here.
And once you do it here, then you can
actually just solve the minimization
problem. All right.
Okay. So, um,
one thing that arises from this guy
is that
this is an interesting formula,
right? Think about it. If I if I have
that y is a + b x plus some noise. Now
not things are no longer on the on
something. I have that y is equal to a +
bx plus some noise which is usually
denoted by epsilon. So that's the
distribution right? If I tell you the
distribution of X and I say Y is a plus
bx plus epsilon I tell you the
distribution of Y and if maybe that
those two are independent you have a
distribution on Y.
So what happens is that I can actually
always say well you know this is
equivalent to saying that epsilon is
equal to y minus a plus bx right
I can always write this it's just uh I
mean it's the tology
but here for those guys this is not for
any guy right this is really for the
best fit a and b those ones that satisfy
this gradient is equal to zero thing
then what we had is that the expectation
of epsilon
was equal to expectation of y minus a +
b expectation of x right by linearity of
the expectation which was equal to zero.
So for this best fit
we have zero.
Now the coariance between x and y
uh between sorry x and epsilon
is what? Well, it's the coariance
between X and well epsilon was Y minus A
+ B X.
Okay. Now the coariance is by linear. So
what I have is that the coariance of
this is the coariance of X and time Y
sorry of X and Y minus the coariance
well minus A + B coariance
of X and X
which is
the variance of X
coariance of XY minus A plus be co
variance of x
and let
coariance of uh okay I didn't write it
so here I have coariance of xy is equal
to b variance of x right
uh so
why uh what did Okay.
Coance of XY. Yeah, that's because I
cannot do that with the coariance. Um,
yeah, I have those averages again. Um,
no, because this is centered, right?
Sorry, this is centered. So this is
actually equal to the expectation of x *
y - a + bx
right the the coariance is equal to the
product just because this right hand
side is actually centered. So this is
the expectation of x * y
minus
the expectation of a uh * x
a * the expectation of x plus b
minus b * the expectation of x^2.
Well actually maybe I should not really
go too far.
So this is actually the one that I need.
But if I stop here,
this is actually equal to zero, right?
Those are the same equations.
Okay. Yeah.
So we're just saying that if I actually
believed that this best fit was the one
that gave me the right parameters, what
would that imply on the noise itself on
this epsilon? So here we're actually
just trying to find some necessary
condition for the noise to hold for the
noise. And so those conditions are that
first the expectation is zero. That's
what we got here. And then that the
coariance between the noise and x has to
be zero as well. Okay. So those are
actually conditions that the noise must
satisfy. But the noise was just not
really defined as noise itself. We were
just saying okay if we're going to put
some assumptions on X on the epsilon
what do we better have? So the first one
is that it's centered which is good
because otherwise the noise would shift
everything. So now when you look at a a
a linear regression model typically if
you look if you open a book it doesn't
start by saying let the noise be the
difference between y and what I actually
want y to be. It says let y be a plus bx
plus epsilon. So conversely if we assume
that this is the model that we have
then we're going to have to assume that
epsilon we're going to assume that
epsilon is centered and that the
coariance between x and epsilon is zero.
Actually often we're going to assume
much more. And one way to ensure that
those two things are satisfied is to
assume that x is independent of epsilon.
For example, if you assume that X is
independent of epsilon, of course, the
coariance is going to be zero
or we might assume that the conditional
expectation of e of epsilon given x is
equal to zero. Then that implies that
okay now the fact that it's centered is
one thing. So if we make this
assumption,
what the only thing it's telling us is
that those abs that come right, we
started from there. Y is equal to A plus
B X plus some epsilon for some A and
some B. What it turns out is that those
ep's and B's are actually the ones that
you would get by solving this
expectation of square thing.
All right. So when you asked back when
you were following Yeah. So uh when you
asked uh you know why don't we take the
square for example or the power four or
something like this then here I'm saying
well if I have y is equal to a plus bx I
don't actually need to put too much
assumptions on epsilon if epsilon is
actually satisfying those two things
expectation is equal to zero and
coariance with x is equal to zero then
the right a and b that I'm looking for
actually the ones that come with the
square not with power four or power 25.
Okay, so those are actually pretty weak
assumptions. If we want to do inference,
we're going to have to assume slightly
more. If we want to use t distributions
at some point, for example, and we will,
we're going to have to assume that
epsilon has a Gaussian distribution. So
if you want to start doing more
statistics beyond just like doing this
le square thing, which is minimizing the
square criterion, you're actually going
to have to put more assumptions. But
right now, we did not need them. we only
need that epsilon has mean zero and
coariance zero with x.
Okay, so let's start with so that was
basically probabilistic, right? We're
trying to say if I were to do
probability and I were trying to model
the relationship between two random
variables x and y in the form y is a
plus bx plus some noise. This is what
would come out. Everything was
expectations. There was no data
involved. So now let's go to the data
problem which is now I do not have I do
not know what the expectations are in
particular I don't know what the
coariance of x and y is and I don't know
what the expectation of x and the
expectation of y of y are so I have data
to do that so how am I going to do this
well I'm just going to say well if I
want x1 y1
xn and yn and I'm going to assume that
they're iid
and I'm actually going to assume that
they have some model right so I'm going
to assume that I have that a so that yi
follows the same model
so epsilon i and I want say that epsil
expectation of epsilon i is zero and
coariance of x i ep epsilon i is equal
to zero so I'm going to put the same
model on all the data. So you can see
that A is not AI and B is not BI. It's
the same. So as my data increases, I
should be able to recover the correct
things as the size of my data increases.
Okay, so this is what uh the statistical
problem look like. You're given the
points.
There is a true line from which this
point was generated, right? There was
this line. There was a true AB
that I used to draw this plot and that
was the line. So first I picked an x say
uniformly at random on this interval 0
to two. Let's say that was this one.
Then I I said well I want y to be a plus
bx. So it should be here. But then I'm
going to add some noise epsilon to go
away again back from this line.
And actually that's actually mean here.
We actually got two points correct on
this line. So there's basically two
epsilons that were small enough that the
dots actually look like they're on the
line. Everybody's clear about what I'm
drawing? So now, of course, if you're a
statistician, you don't see this. You
only see this. And you have to recover
this guy. And it's going to look like
this, right? You're going to have an
estimated line, which is the red one,
and the blue line, which is the uh uh uh
the true one, the one that actually
generated the data. And your question
is, well, this line corresponds to some
parameters a hat and b hat. How can I
make sure that those two lines, how far
those two lines are? And one way to
address this question is to say how far
is a from a hat and how far is b from b
hat. Okay, another question of course
that you ask is how do you find a hat
and b hat?
And as you can see it's basically the
same thing. Remember what was a? So b
was
uh the coariance
between x and y
divided by the variance of x right we
which I can rewrite as the expectation
of xy minus expectation of x time
expectation of y
divided by expectation of x^2
minus expectation of x the whole thing
square. Okay,
if you look at the expression for B hat,
I basically replaced all the
expectations by bars,
right? So I said, well, this guy I'm
going to estimate by an average.
So that's the so xy bar
is 1 / n sum from i= 1 to n of x i * yi.
XAR of course is just the one that we're
used to.
And same for Y bar. X squar bar, the one
that's here,
is the average of the squares. And XAR
square is the square of the average.
Okay, so you just basically replace
this guy by Xbar, this guy by Y bar,
this guy by X² bar, and this guy by Xar
in the square. Okay, so that's basically
one way to do it. Everywhere you see an
expectation, you replace it by an
average. That's the usual statistical
hammer. You can actually be slightly
more subtle about this.
And as an exercise, I invite you to just
to make sure that you know how to do
this computation. It's going to be
exactly the same kind of computations
that we've done. But uh as an exercise,
you can check that if you actually look
at say well what I wanted to minimize
here, I had an expectation, right?
And I said, let's minimize this thing.
Well,
let's replace this by an average first
and now minimize.
Okay. So if I do this, it turns out I'm
going to actually get the same result.
The minimum of the average is basically
this when I replace the average by the
sorry when I replace the expectation by
the average and then minimize it's the
same thing as first minimizing and then
replacing expectation by averages in
this case.
Again, this is a much more general
principle because if you don't have a
closed form for the minimum like for
some say likelihood problems, well, you
might not actually have a possibility to
just look at what the formula looks
like, see where the expectations show up
and then just plug in the averages
instead. So, you might this is the one
you want to keep in mind. And again as
an exercise.
Okay. So here and then you do
expectation replace by averages
and then that's the same answer and I
I encourage you to solve the exercise.
Okay, everybody's clear that this is
actually the same expression for a hat
and b hat that we had before where we
that we had for a and b when we replace
the expectations by averages
here. By the way, I minimize the sum
rather than the average. It's clear to
everyone that this is the same thing.
Right?
Yeah.
So we did switch the derivative and the
expectation
before you came I think.
Um all right so indeed the picture was
the one that we said. So visually this
is what we're doing. We're looking among
all the lines. For each line, we compute
this distance, right? So, if I gave you
another line, there would be another set
of arrows. You look at their length. You
square it, and then you sum it all, and
you find the line that has the minimum
sum of squared length of the arrows. All
right? And those are the arrows that
we're looking at. But again, you could
actually think of other distances and
you would actually get different uh you
could actually get different solutions,
right? So there's something called mean
absolute deviation which rather than
minimizing this thing is actually
minimizing the sum from i= 1 to n of the
absolute value of y minus a + bx i
and that will that's not something for
which you're going to have a closed form
as you can imagine uh you might have
something that's sort of implicit uh but
you can actually still solve it
numerically and this is something that
people also like to use but way way less
than the le squares
What did I just what?
The sum of the absolute values of y i
minus a plus bx i.
So it's the same except that I don't
have the square here.
Okay.
So arguably, you know, predicting uh
price uh a demand based on price is a
fairly naive problem. Typically, what we
have is a bunch of data that we've
collected and we're hoping that together
they can help us do a better prediction.
All right, so maybe I don't have only
the price, but uh maybe I have a bunch
of other social uh indicators. Maybe I
know the competi competition, the price
of the competition. Maybe I know a bunch
of other things that are actually
relevant. And so I'm trying to find a
way to combine a bunch of points, a
bunch of measures. Let's say for
example, there's a nice example that I
like, which is uh uh people were trying
to measure um something related to uh
your body mass index. It's so basically
the volume of your the density of your
body and the way you can do this is by
just you know really weighing someone
and also putting them in some you know
cubic meter of water and see how much
overflows and then you have both the
volume and the uh and um uh uh and the
mass of this person and you can you know
start computing density but uh as you
can imagine you know I would not
personally like to go to a gym where the
first thing they ask is to just go in
some uh uh bucket of water. And so
people try to find ways to measure this
based on other indicators that are much
easier to measure. For example, I don't
know, the length of my forearm and the
circumference of my head and maybe from
maybe my my belly would probably be more
appropriate here. And so, you know, they
just try to find something that actually
makes sense. And so there's actually a
nice example where you can show that if
you measure I think one of the most
significant was with the circumference
of your wrist. This is actually a very
good indicator of uh your uh your uh
body density. And uh it turns out that
um if you stuff all the bunch of things
together, you might actually get a very
good formula that explains things. All
right. So what we're going to do is
rather than saying we have only one x to
explain y's, let's say we have 20 x's
that we're trying to combine to explain
why. And again, just like assuming
something of the form y is a plus b * x
was the simplest thing we could do here.
We're just going to assume that we have
y is a + b1 x1 plus b2 x2 plus b3 x3.
And we can write it in a vector form by
writing that yi is x i transpose b which
is now a vector plus epsilon i. Okay.
And here on the board I'm going to have
a right hard time doing boldface but all
these things are vectors right except
for y
which is a number right? Yi is a number.
it's always the value of my y-axis.
Okay? So even if my x-axis lives on this
is x1 and this is x2, y is really just
the real valued function. And so I'm
going to get a bunch of points x1 y1 and
I'm going to see how much they respond.
Right? So for example, it's the my body
density is y and then all the x's are a
bunch of other things. Agreed with that?
So this is an equation that holds on the
real line. But this guy here is in R
P
and this guy is in RP.
It's actually common to talk to to call
B beta when it's a vector and that's the
usual
that's the usual linear regression
notation. Y is X beta plus epsilon.
So X's are called explanatory variables.
Y is called explain variable or
dependent variable
uh or response variable. It has a bunch
of names. You can use whatever you think
feel more comfortable with. They should
it should actually be explicit, right?
So that's all you care about. Um
now
what we typically do is that rather so
you notice here that there's actually no
intercept. If I actually fold that back
down to one dimension, there's actually
a is equal to zero. Right? If I go back
to P is equal to 1,
that would imply that yi is well say
beta * x plus epsilon i. And that's not
good. I want to have an intercept. And
the way I do this rather than writing a
plus this and you know just have like a
an overload of notation. What I'm
actually doing is that I fold back I
fold my intercept back into my x.
And so if I measure 20 variables, I'm
going to create a 21st variable which is
always equal to one. Okay? So you should
need to think of x as being one and then
x1
x p and now sorry xp minus one I guess.
Okay. And now this is in RP.
Okay. So the we I'm always going to
assume that the first one is one. I can
always do that. If I have a table of
data, if my data is given to me in an
Excel spreadsheet
and here I have the density that I
measured on my data and then maybe here
I have the height and here I have the
wrists circumference. And I have all
these things. All I have to do is to
create another column here of ones. I
just put one, one, one, one, one, one.
Okay, that's all I have to do to create
this guy. Agreed?
And now my x is going to be just one of
those rows.
Okay, so that's this is x i this entire
row and this entry here is yi.
Okay.
So now for my noise coefficients, I'm
still going to assume ask for the same
thing except that here the covariance is
not between X between one random
variable and and another random variable
is between a random vector and a random
variable.
Okay, how do I measure the coariance
between a vector and a random variable?
Yeah. So basically well okay uh
yeah so yeah I mean you know coance
vector is equal to zero is the same
thing as it norm equal to zero but yeah
this is basically thought of entry-wise
for each coordinate of x I want that the
coariance between epsilon and this co
this coordinate of x is equal to zero so
I'm just asking this for all coordinates
again in most instances we're going to
think that epsilon is independent of x
and that's something we can understand
without thinking about coordinates.
All right. So, yeah.
I'm sorry. Can you repeat the question?
I didn't hear.
Yeah, beta is the parameter we're
looking for, right? Just like it was a
and the pair above the whole vector beta
now.
So there's no well you can you think of
an intercept of a function that takes I
mean there is there is one actually
that's the one for which betas all the
betas that don't correspond to the
vector of all ones. So the intercept is
really the the weight that I put on this
guy. That's the beta that's going to
come to this guy. But we don't really
talk about intercept in two dimensions.
If sorry if x lives in two dimensions.
Uh the way you want to think about this
is uh you take a sheet of paper like
that. Right? So I have now I have points
that live in three dimensions. Right? So
let's say one direction here is x1. This
direction is x2 and this direction is y.
Okay. And so what's going to happen is
that I'm going to have like my points
that live in this threedimensional
space. And what I'm trying to do when
I'm trying to do a linear model for
those guys when I assume a linear model,
what I assume is that there's a plane in
those three dimensions. So think of this
guy as being going everywhere and
there's a plane al close to which all my
points should be. Right? That's what's
happening in two dimensions. If you see
higher dimensions, then congratulations
to you. But uh I can't. All right? So um
uh but you know you can definitely
formalize that fairly easily
mathematically and just talk about
vectors right
so now here if I talk about the le
squared error estimator or just the le
squares estimator of beta it's simply
the same thing as before just like we
said
so remember you should think of b as
being as beta as being both the pair ab
generalized okay so we said, "Oh, we
wanted to minimize the expectation of y
minus
a + b x^
squar right now. So that's in for p is
equal to 1. Now for p larger than or
equal to two, we're just going to write
it as y - x transpose
beta
squared
Uh
okay. So I'm just trying to minimize
this quantity. Of course I don't have
access to this. So what I'm going to do
is I'm going to replace my expectation
by an average.
[Applause]
So here I'm using the notation t because
beta is the true one and I don't want to
to just so here I have a variable t
that's just moving around and so now I'm
going to take the square of this thing
and when I minimize this overall t in
our p the arg min the minimum is
attained
at beta hat which is my estimator.
Okay.
So if I want to actually compute Yeah.
Uh you mean the previous slide?
So again I'm just defining an estimator
just like I would tell you just take the
estimator that has coordinates four
everywhere.
Yeah. So
um so
um
yes. So the answer is yes. I'm I I was
just trying to think if this was
captured. So it is not captured in this
guy because this is just telling me that
the expectation of
epsilon i minus expectation of epsilon i
is equal to zero. Okay. Yeah. So yes I
need to have that epsilon i has mean
zero for let's assume that expectation
of epsilon i is zero for this problem.
Okay.
Um,
and we also need we're going to need
something about some sort of question
about the variance being not equal to
zero, right? But this is going to come
up later. So let's think for one second
about doing the same approach as we did
before. Take the partial derivative with
respect to the first coordinate of t
with respect to the second coordinate of
t with respect to the third coordinate
of t, etc. So that's what we did before.
We had two equations and we reconciled
them because it was fairly easy to
solve, right?
But in general, what's going to happen
is we're going to have a system of
equations. We're going to have a system
of P equations, one for each of the
coordinates of T. And we're going to
have P uh unknowns each coordinate of T.
And so we're going to have the system to
solve. Actually, turns out it's going to
be a linear system, but it's not going
to be something that we're going to be
able to solve coordinate by coordinate.
It's going to be annoying to solve. You
know, you can guess that what's going to
happen, right? We here it involved the
coariance between X and epsilon right
that's what it involved to understand um
sorry the coordinate the the correlation
between X and Y to understand how this
the solution of this problem was in this
case there's going to be not only the
correlation sorry the coariance between
X1 and Y X2 and Y X3 etc all the way to
XP and Y but there's also going to be
all the cross coariances between XJ and
X K and so this is going to be a
nightmare to solve
like in this system and what we do is
that we go on to using a matrix notation
so that when we take derivatives we take
derivative we we talk about gradients
and then we can invert matrices and
solve linear systems in a somewhat
formal manner by just saying that if I
want to solve the system ax=
b rather than actually solving this for
each coordinate of x individually I just
say that x is equal to a inverse time b
right so that's really what why we're
going to the the equation one because we
have a formalism to write the that X is
the solution of this system. I'm not
telling you that this is going to be
easy to solve numerically, but at least
I can write it. Okay? And so here's how
it goes. I have a bunch of vectors.
I have So what are my vectors? Right? So
I have X1. Oh, by the way, I didn't
actually mention that when I put the
lowercase, when I put the subscript, I'm
talking about the observation. And when
I put the superscript, I'm talking about
the coordinates, right? So I have x1
which is equal to one x x11
x uh one p
x2 which is one x21
x2 p
all the way to xn which is one
x n1
xnp. All right. Right? So those are my n
observed x's and then I have another y1
y2 yn that comes paired with those guys.
Okay.
So the first thing is that I'm going to
stack those guys into some vector that
I'm going to call y. So maybe I should
put an arrow for the purpose of the
blackboard and it's just y1 to yn. Okay.
So this is a vector in rn.
Now, if I want to stack those guys
together, I can either create a long
vector of size n times p, but the
problem is that I lose the role of who's
a coordinate and who's uh who's an
observation. And so, it's actually nicer
for me to just put those guys next to
each other and create one new uh
variable. And so, the way I'm going to
do this is rather than actually stacking
those guys like that, I'm going to take
their transpose and stack them as rows
of a matrix. Okay? So I'm going to
create a matrix which here is denoted
typically by I'm going to write x
doubleb bar
and here I'm going to actually just so
since I'm taking those guys like this
the first column is going to be only
ones
and then I'm going to have uh well x11
x1 p and here I'm going to have x n1
x np
okay so here The number of rows is n and
the number of columns is p. One row per
observation, one column per coordinate.
And again, I uh make your life
miserable. Uh because this really should
be p minus one because I already used
the first one for this guy. I'm sorry
about that. It's a bit painful. Uh so
usually we don't even write what's in
there so we don't have to think about
it. Those are just vectors of size p.
Okay, so now that I create this thing, I
can actually just basically stack up all
my models. So y i equals x i transpose
beta plus epsilon i for all i = 1 to n.
This transforms into this is equivalent
to saying that the vector Y is equal to
the matrix X time beta plus a matrix
plus a vector epsilon where epsilon is
just epsilon 1 to epsilon N.
Right? So I have just this system which
I write as a matrix which really just
consists in stacking up all these
equations next to each other.
All right.
So now that I have this model, this is
the usual le squares model. And here
when I want to write my le squares
criterion in terms of matrices, right?
My le squares criterion remember was sum
from i= 1 to n of yi minus x i transpose
beta squared. Well, here it's really
just the sum of the square of the
coefficients of the of the vector y - x
beta. So this is actually equal to the
norm squar of y - x beta^ 2.
That's just the square norm is by
definition the sum of the square of the
coordinates.
And so now I can actually talk about
minimizing a norm squared. And here it's
going to be easier for me to take
derivatives. All right. So we'll do that
uh next time.